
Chance At a Students Fingertips

An entire life being held in someone's hand is no longer unimaginable.
A majority of learning that is going on in society right now is through the devices people have.
If someone were to take that away from a person that would disconnect them not just from social media or YouTube or music,
but this takes away friends, family, freedom of speech, and an enormous amount of learning that is available online.
Online and the internet is no longer just a convenient place to send messages; it can hold a person's entire life, and endless learning.
The Internet contains an unlimited amount of learning opportunities. Whether it’s from people and cultures or from online schooling,
learning is one tap of the screen away.
Online Education and Online Degree Programs help many have opportunities they otherwise would have never had a chance at. (Needs work)
Many can benefit from online education. Not all who choose online schooling for their education simply find it easier to learn.
There are many reasons one may choose to have their education online. Some may choose to pursue education online because of a disability,
the busyness of their life’s, or simply location.
Online education opens a door of opportunities for those who may have otherwise
found it difficult or impossible to pursue their education in another way.
Online education can provide a new opportunity from those who have disabilities.
Some may choose that staying at home is a safer and more convenient option than going to school in-person.
Technology allows for schooling to be brought home from those who many have these difficulties.
Technological advances that are available today such as text to speech and captions,
are allowing for more accessibility for some students who may have otherwise had to come to class.
With online education books are available with text to speech. As well as online videos are also available with captions (…).
When going to class those who may use captions on videos would then need an interpreter.
Online education may also be chosen by those with disabilities due to difficulty with transportation.
It was that found that 31% of those with disabilities are found to not have proper transportation,
this can be due to many reasons,
including the equipment one may need for their vehicles or simply that fact they aren’t able to drive (…).
When having difficulties with transportation online education provides opportunity for continuing one’s schooling.
Lastly one with disabilities may choose to attend online schooling due to the inaccessibility that in-person schools can have.
Many schools although showing effort to have accessibility for students don’t always keep the accessibility available.
One student by the names of Cox got stuck outside of a budling at his university in a handicap accessible lift,
during a snowstorm.
This lift was for students like Cox to get around the building with ease but in this situation,
it caused him more harm than good (...).
Events like this aren’t uncommon as Cox went on to mention he will often leave for class early and not arrive on time due to problems that occur on his way.
These events can be a major toll for some students.
Online education can help those who either don’t want to add this extra difficulty to their
life or simply don’t have access to a university or school with accessible features.
When attending in person school there is a lot of time spent traveling to and from and going to classes.
Many people who pursue online education have busy lives this can be due to having full time jobs or families to take care of.
 Having this opportunity for online education no longer requires people to put their education on the back burner to their lives.
 Many students who pursue online degree programs are found to be older than some might expect.
 It is found that the average of someone in an online degree program is 32, it is also found
 that 84 percent of these students are working (…). At this age people are often raising children,
 and not to forget this is also around the time where table are turned, and adults become caregivers
 to their parents. These students are working adults with family’s and many responsibilities in their life’s.
 The commute to and from school takes time out of student’s days where they could either be relaxing or doing their schoolwork.
 Many who are taking online college courses work full time often not having a lot of time in their day,
 and there Is time in which those commuting must consider, the time in which it takes to travel to and from school.
 Online degree programs allow for students to save time commuting. In the American Community Survey,
 it was found that the average commuting time for a person is 27.6 minutes (…).
 That is nearly an hour extra a day in which a student could be using in a more productive manner.
 With access to online education older and busier students have a better chance at coming back to school later in life.
 Online Education provides flexibility in daily life and much less wasted time during commutes.