Adobe Premiere Vs. Final Cut Pro
I wouldn't say I like Premiere, which was my initial thought.
I had formed a bias from a previous assignment from another course.
This course caused me to hate this platform. During this other course,
I had to do one video assignment that was around 15 minutes long.
I not only had to learn to film in a very odd way during this assignment,
but the editing was so tricky. I spent over 4-5 hours just editing
out all the pieces of the video that I didn't want. I then thought
any editing would be like this forever; like why would anyone ever
want to do this? I never wanted to interact with this platform again,
but recently, I had to.
During this other course I had taken, we weren't shown or given videos
on how to edit. I think because I didn't have any examples to follow
at the time to do this assignment, I ended up not only hating the
project but not retaining or learning how to edit videos anyway.
I thought the amount of difficulty I was having wouldn't become any
easier if I had tried to learn any other features of Adobe Premiere.
Having these videos really helped lay out the Premier and how to use
it. The idea of using it was way less daunting than before. There was
a lot of information that made it slightly difficult to follow,
but knowing the struggle I had a few years; this was nothing compared
to my confusion previously. But, when this past assignment came up,
I asked my friend what platform he used for his YouTube videos.
He said Final Cut Pro.
I didn't know what this platform was,
but I was willing to try it out.
He then offered to let me use his account to download this platform.
Which was amazing.
Final Cut Pro
I was scared this platform was going to be just like Adobe Premiere.
I was confused at first, but after about 10 minutes, I got the hang
of all the features I needed, which to me showed that this program was
already a thousand times better than Adobe Premiere. Right off the bat,
Final Cut Pro was crazy easy. I loved it.
When I opened Final Cut Pro, I found the layout similar to Adobe Premiere,
but it was much easier to follow after looking at some of the features.
Then when it came to editing videos, I liked how I could function within
the program. The components were much smoother, and the workflow for me
was so much better. One thing that I really liked was how Final Cut Pro's
clipping/editing was. I found this significantly more straightforward than
when I had to use Adobe Premiere in the past.
One thing I didn't like is there weren't any little markers I could place
on the timeline as Adobe Premiere had. There is probably something similar
on Final Cut Pro that I don't know about, but the fact that I didn't have
it for this past project made a few more things annoying. When an Idea came up,
I wasn't just able to make a small marker. I had to actually stop and then
take my time to individually figure out what I wanted to do in that section.
Overall, in the end, now that I have given Premiere a second chance by
watching the videos, and now that I have used Final Cut Pro in projects,
I have to say Premiere isn't as bad as I thought it was;
I just needed guidance. But For the future,
I plan to stick with Final Cut Pro if I ever need video editing software
for something more professional. Otherwise, I think I will stick to
the cheap free apps on phones that don't work great all the time.