The Project Gutenberg eBook of The cobbler of Nîmes, by Mary Imlay
Taylor

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you
will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before
using this eBook.

Title: The cobbler of Nîmes

Author: Mary Imlay Taylor

Release Date: October 18, 2022 [eBook #69180]

Language: English

Produced by: D A Alexander, David E. Brown, and the Online Distributed
             Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This file was
             produced from images generously made available by
             University of California libraries)

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE COBBLER OF NÎMES ***





THE COBBLER OF NÎMES




BY

M. IMLAY TAYLOR

  On the Red Staircase. 12mo        $1.25
  An Imperial Lover. 12mo            1.25
  A Yankee Volunteer. 12mo           1.25
  The House of the Wizard. 12mo      1.25
  The Cardinal’s Musketeer. 12mo     1.25
  The Cobbler of Nîmes. 12mo         1.25




  THE
  COBBLER OF NÎMES

  BY
  M. IMLAY TAYLOR

  [Illustration]

  CHICAGO
  A. C. McCLURG & CO.
  1900




  COPYRIGHT
  BY A. C. MCCLURG & CO.
  A.D. 1900

  _All rights reserved_




CONTENTS.


  CHAPTER                                   PAGE

      I. THE BODY OF A DAMNED PERSON           7

     II. THE SHOP OF TWO SHOES                20

    III. MADEMOISELLE’S SLIPPERS              31

     IV. ROSALINE                             44

      V. THE COBBLER’S GUEST                  52

     VI. A MILITARY SUITOR                    64

    VII. A STRING OF TROUT                    75

   VIII. BABET VISITS THE COBBLER             86

     IX. CHARLOT BURNS A CANDLE               97

      X. A DANGEROUS SUIT                    106

     XI. FRANÇOIS MAKES A PLEDGE             119

    XII. THE FINGER OF FATE                  130

   XIII. THE BATTLE HYMN                     140

    XIV. “AND ALL FOR LOVE”                  151

     XV. THE TEMPTATION OF LE BOSSU          164

    XVI. A BRIEF DELAY                       178

   XVII. M. DE BAUDRI’S TERMS                189

  XVIII. ROSALINE’S HUMBLE FRIENDS           203

    XIX. “MORTIS PORTIS FRACTIS!”            213

     XX. THE COBBLER’S FAITH                 225

    XXI. IN THE WOODS OF ST. CYR             237

   XXII. THE OLD WINDMILL                    249

  XXIII. THE COBBLER’S BARGAIN               260

   XXIV. “O DEATH, WHERE IS THY STING?”      269

    XXV. THE SHIP AT SEA                     275




The Cobbler of Nîmes

[Illustration]




CHAPTER I

THE BODY OF A DAMNED PERSON


It was the month of June, 1703, and about noontide on the last day
of the week. The fair in the market-place at Nîmes was therefore
at its height. A juggler was swallowing a sword in the midst of an
admiring circle. Mademoiselle Héloïse, the _danseuse_, was walking the
tight-rope near at hand, and the pick-pockets were plying their trade
profitably on the outskirts of the throng. There was a dancing bear,
and beyond him--a rival attraction--a monkey in scarlet breeches,
with a blouse or camisole over them. The little creature’s antics
were hailed with shouts of derisive laughter and cries of “Camisard!”
“Barbet!” “Huguenot!” the monkey’s little blouse being an unmistakable
caricature of the dress of the Camisards. It therefore behooved the
wise to laugh, and they did, and that loudly,--though many a heart
was in secret sympathy with the Huguenot rebels of the Cévennes; but
were they not in Nîmes? And the Intendant Bâville was there, and
the dragoons of King Louis XIV.; so it was that the monkey gathered
many a half-crown, and sous and deniers in profusion, in his little
cap, and carried them--chattering--to the showman. It was a motley
throng: broad, red-faced market-women, old crones with bearded lip
and toothless gums, little gamins of the market with prematurely aged
faces, countrymen who glanced askance at the monkey while they laughed,
pretty peasant girls who had sold their eggs and their poultry, and
come to spend their newly acquired riches in ribbons and trinkets, and
to have their fortunes told by the old gypsy in the yellow pavilion.
Some strolling musicians were playing a popular air, two drunken men
were fighting, and a busy tradesman was selling his wares near the
entrance of a tent that was manifestly the centre of attraction. It was
of white canvas and decorated with numerous images of the devil,--a
black figure with horns, hoofs, and tail, engaged in casting another
person into the flames; the whole being more startling than artistic.
At the door of this tent was a man mounted on a barrel, and dressed
fantastically in black, with a repetition of the devils and flames,
in red and yellow, around the edge of his long gown, which flapped
about a pair of thin legs, set squarely in the centre of two long,
schooner-shaped feet. This person, whose face was gross and dull rather
than malicious, kept calling his invitation and bowing low as each new
visitor dropped a half-crown into the box fastened on the front of the
barrel beneath his feet.

“Messieurs et mesdames!” he cried, “only a half-crown to see the body
of a damned person!”

He raised his voice almost to a scream, to be heard in the babel of
tongues; he clapped his hands to attract notice; he swayed to and fro
on his barrel.

“Here is the body of a damned person!” he shouted. “_Dieu!_ what an
opportunity for the good of your soul! Too much, madame?” he said to
a fishwife who grumbled at the price, “too much! ’Tis a chance in a
thousand! The body came from the Tour de Constance! Madame will have
her money’s worth.”

Madame went in, licking her lips like a wolf. The curtain of the tent
swung to behind her. A peasant lad followed her, hesitating too over
the half-crown, but then the spectacle was worth money. A soldier
followed, then a butcher, and two stupid-looking servant-girls, with
frightened faces, but still eager to see. Then there was a pause, and
the showman began to shout once more; he had need to, for the bear was
performing with unusual vivacity, and the _danseuse_ displayed her
pretty legs as she tripped on the rope.

“Half a crown, messieurs et mesdames,” cried the man of the black robe;
“half a crown to see a dead and damned Huguenot!”

“Too much, monsieur!” said a voice behind him.

He started and looked back into the face of a little hunchbacked man
who had been watching him curiously.

“You are not a good Catholic, M. le Bossu!” replied the showman,
mocking, for the hunchback wore a poor suit of brown and a frayed hat.

“I am a good Catholic,” he replied calmly, “but your price is
high--’tis only a dead Huguenot.”

“_Dame!_ but live ones are too plenty,” retorted the other, with
a loud laugh. “What are you to complain?” he added gayly,--“the
hunchback!--_le bossu_!”

“_Le Bossu_--yes,” replied the hunchback, calmly; “that is what men
call me.”

Again the showman mocked him, doffing his cap and grinning.

“Your Excellency’s name?” he demanded.

The hunchback took no notice of him; he had his hand in his wallet
feeling for a half-crown; he had determined to see the damned person.
But the other got his answer; a little gamin piped up on the edge of
the crowd, pointing his finger at the cripple.

“’Tis only Charlot,” he said, “the shoemaker of the Rue St. Antoine.”

The showman laughed again.

“Enter, Maître Savetier!” he said derisively, “and see the dead
Huguenot. _Dame!_ but I believe he is one himself,” he added, under his
breath, peering sharply at the pale face of le Bossu as he entered the
tent.

But a minute later the hunchback was forgotten and the showman was
screaming again.

“This way, mesdames! This way, to see a damned person! Half a crown!
half a crown!”

Within, the tent was lighted solely by a small aperture at the top, and
the effect was rather of a murky twilight than of broad noonday. It
was draped with cheap red cloth, and in the centre--directly under the
opening in the top--was a rough bier constructed of bare boards, and on
this lay a body only partially covered with a piece of coarse serge;
images of the devil--cut out of black stuff--were sewed on the corners
of this wretched pall. The visitors, the sight-seers, who had paid
their half-crowns to enjoy this gruesome spectacle, moved slowly past
it, making the circuit of the tent and finally passing out at the door
by which they had entered. When the hunchback came in, he paused long
enough to become accustomed to the swift transition from sunlight to
shadow, and then he too proceeded to join the circle around the corpse.
There were many comments made, the sight affected the spectators
differently. The two servant-girls clung together, whispering
hysterical confidences; the peasant youth stared open-mouthed, fright
showing plainly in his eyes; the soldier looked down with brutal
indifference; the old fishwife showed satisfaction, her wolf mouth was
slightly opened by a grin that displayed three long yellow teeth--all
she possessed; a red handkerchief was tied around her head and from
below it hung her long gray locks. Her short petticoat and bodice
revealed a withered, lean form, and her fingers were like talons. She
feasted her eyes on the dead face, and then she squinted across the
body at the man who stood like a statue opposite. He was young, with a
sad, dark countenance and was poorly, even shabbily dressed. But it was
none of these things that the old crone noted, it was the expression
of grief and horror that seemed frozen on his features. He did not
see her, he did not see the others passing by him--with more than one
curious glance; he seemed like a man in a trance, deaf, blind, dumb,
but yet gazing fixedly at the inanimate figure on the bier. It was the
corpse of a young woman, who had been handsome; the features were still
so, and her long black hair fell about her shoulders like a mourning
pall.

“_Dieu!_” said the fishwife, licking her lips, “what a white throat she
had; ’twould have been a pity to hang her. See, there is a mark there
on her arm where ’twas bound! Is she not pretty, Bossu?”

The hunchback had approached the corpse, and at this appeal he nodded
his head.

“_Diable!_” ejaculated the soldier turning on the old crone, “’tis
heresy to call a damned person pretty, Mère Tigrane.”

Mère Tigrane leered at him with horrible intelligence.

“No one is to think a heretic pretty but the dragoons, eh?” she said
grinning. “_Dame!_ we know what you think, monsieur.”

The man laughed brutally, and she edged up to him, whispering in his
ear, her narrow eyes on the silent visitor opposite. The dragoon looked
over too at her words, and broke out with an oath.

“You are a witch, Mère Tigrane,” he said uneasily; “let me alone!”

Again she whispered, but laughed this time, showing her yellow teeth.

Meanwhile the showman had been fortunate and a dozen new-comers crowded
into the tent, pressing the others aside. This afforded an opportunity
for the hunchback to approach the young man, who had remained by the
bier as if chained to the ground. Le Bossu touched his arm, at first
lightly, but finding himself unheeded, he jerked the other’s sleeve.
The stranger started and stared at him as if he had just awakened from
sleep.

“A word with you, friend,” said the hunchback, softly.

The man hesitated, started, paused and cast another long look at the
dead face, and then followed the cripple through the group at the door,
out into the sunshine and uproar of the market-place. They were not
unobserved by Mère Tigrane, but she made no effort to follow them; she
was watching the new arrivals as they approached the corpse. As she saw
their faces of curiosity and horror, she laughed.

“_Mère de Dieu!_” she said, “’tis worth a half-crown after all--and I
paid Adolphe in false coin too, _pauvre garçon_!”

In the market-place, the stranger had halted with the hunchbacked
cobbler.

“What do you want?” he demanded of le Bossu; “I do not know you.”

“You were in danger,” replied the hunchback, quietly, “and you are in
trouble; the _bon Dieu_ knows that I also am in trouble.”

The little man’s tone, his deformity, his kind eyes appealed to the
other.

“We should be friends,” he said grimly. “_Dieu!_ I am indeed in
trouble.”

The hunchback made a sign to him to be cautious, the crowd hemmed them
in, the monkey chattered, the bear danced, Mademoiselle Héloïse was
singing a savory song from Paris. The whole square was white with the
sunshine; above, the sky was deeply blue.

“Follow me, friend,” said le Bossu again, and commenced to thread his
way through the crowd.

His new acquaintance hesitated a moment, cast a backward glance at the
tent he had just quitted, and then quietly followed the hunchback. They
had to cross the market-place, and the little cobbler seemed to be
widely known. Goodwives greeted him, young girls giggled heartlessly
before the misshapen figure passed, men nodded indifferently, the
maliciously disposed children calling out “_le Bossu!_” at him as he
went. A heartless rabble out for a gala day; what pity had they for
the hunchbacked shoemaker of the St. Antoine? The man who followed
him escaped notice; he was straight-limbed and erect, and his shabby
dress disguised him as completely as any masquerade. When they had left
the crowd behind, they walked together, but still silently, along the
thoroughfare.

The groups of pleasure-seekers grew more rare as they advanced,
and they were almost alone when they passed the Garden of the
Récollets--the Franciscan Convent--and entered the Rue St. Antoine.
Here it was that the stranger roused himself and addressed his
companion.

“Where are we going?” he asked sharply.

“To my shop,” replied le Bossu; “’tis but ten yards ahead now. Have no
fear,” he added kindly; “the _bon Dieu_ made me in such shape that my
heart is ever with the sorrowful.”

“I do not understand you,” said the other. “I do not know your
name--you do not ask mine--why do you seek me out?”

“My name is Charlot,” returned the cripple, simply. “I make shoes, and
they call me by more than one name. My rich patrons say Charlot, my
poor ones call me _le Savetier_, others mock me as the hunchback--_le
Bossu_! It does not matter. As for your name, I will know it when you
please, monsieur.”

They had come to an arched gateway between two houses, and the cobbler
entered, followed by the other man. They stood in a court, and on
three sides of it were the faces of three houses; it was a veritable
_cul-de-sac_. A small square of sunshine marked the centre of the
opening, and in this a solitary weed had bloomed, springing up between
the crevices in the stone pavement. To the left was an arched door
with three steps leading to it, and over it hung a sign with two shoes
painted upon it. The hunchback pointed at this.

“Behold my shop,” he said, “the sign of the Two Shoes.”

He took a key out of his wallet, and ascending the steps, opened the
door and invited his new acquaintance to enter.




CHAPTER II

THE SHOP OF TWO SHOES


The two, le Bossu and his guest, entered a small room fitted up as
a shop. The window was open and across the unused fireplace were
suspended half a dozen shoes of various sizes. The cobbler’s bench
was strewn with tools, and scraps of leather lay on the floor. On one
side of the room hung a hide prepared for use; opposite was a colored
picture of St. Elizabeth, with her arms full of roses, the patron saint
of the poor. There were two wooden chairs, the cobbler’s stool, and a
box of _sabots_, nothing more. A door opened into the kitchen, where a
narrow flight of stairs--like a ladder--ascended to the second story.
On the kitchen hearth the _pot-au-feu_ was simmering, the savory odor
filling the room, and on the table was a loaf of black bread and some
garlic.

The hunchback asked his guest to be seated and then sat down himself,
looking attentively but kindly at the new arrival. The stranger had
a strong face, although he was still a young man. His complexion
was a clear olive, and his dark eyes were gloomy and even stern. He
wore no periwig, his natural hair curling slightly. In his turn, he
scrutinized the cripple, and never was there a greater contrast. Le
Bossu was small, and the hump on his back made him stoop; as often
occurs in such cases, the upper part of his body and his head were out
of proportion with his small and shrunken limbs. His arms were long and
powerful, however, his hands well shaped and strong, though brown and
callous from labor, and they were skilful hands, able to earn a living
despite the feeble legs and back. His face was pale and drawn from much
physical suffering, but his eyes were beautiful, large, brown, and full
of expression. They redeemed the cripple’s whole aspect, as though the
soul--looking out of its windows--made its own appeal. It was his eye
that won upon his new acquaintance.

“You said you wished to speak to me,” he remarked abruptly. “What is
it?”

“I will tell you the truth, friend,” le Bossu replied calmly, “you
were showing too much emotion yonder; you were observed by the
dragoon and Mère Tigrane. She is a dangerous person; men call her the
she-wolf--_la Louve_.”

“Too much emotion!” repeated the other. “_Dieu!_ you seem an honest
man--shall I tell you who that dead woman was?” he asked recklessly.
“Are you a Catholic?”

“I am,” replied the cobbler, quietly; “’tis best to tell me nothing.”

His visitor stared at him.

“Why did you try to protect me, then?” he asked. “I am a desperate man
and unknown to you--I have no money to reward kindness.”

“Nor to pay for a lodging,” remarked the hunchback.

The other thrust his hand into his pocket and drew out half a crown,
looking at it with a grim smile.

“My worldly goods,” he said.

“I thought so,” rejoined the cobbler, dryly, “and you paid the other
half-crown to see the dead Huguenot woman.”

An expression of pain passed over the face opposite.

“I would have paid more to be sure that it was--” He broke off,
covering his face with his hands. “Oh, _mon Dieu!_” he exclaimed
brokenly.

The hunchback was silent for a few moments, his arms folded and his
eyes on the floor.

“You must leave Nîmes,” he said at last; “you will betray yourself
here. Meanwhile, there is a room overhead; if you wish you can stay
there, free of rent, until you go.”

“Again, why do you do this?” asked the stranger.

The cobbler indicated his hump with a gesture.

“The _bon Dieu_ made me so,” he said simply; “yet I am a scorn in the
market-place, a miserable cripple. I swore to the saints that I would
help the miserable.”

“You will take a risk,” remarked his companion,--“I am François
d’Aguesseau, a Huguenot--”

“Hush!” The cobbler held up his hand. “I do not wish to know, M.
d’Aguesseau. If you will take the upper room, ’tis yours.”

“I will take it while I can pay for it, at least,” said d’Aguesseau,
“and I thank you.”

The hunchback rose, leading the way across the kitchen to the stairs.
He walked slowly, and occasionally dragged one foot, but he ascended
the steps with some agility, followed by his guest. There was a
trap-door at the top, which he opened before they could step on to the
floor above. D’Aguesseau knew that he was taking a great risk, that
this might be a snare laid for those of the Religion, but he was, at
the moment, a desperate and reckless man, and he cared little. He had
entered Nîmes that morning, almost without money, he had just had his
worst fears confirmed, and he cared little now for life or death.

They entered a room above the kitchen, where the cripple slept, and
this opened into another small room over the shop. Both were clean,
though poor and bare. The hunchback stopped before a shrine in his own
chamber, and lighting a taper, set it before the Virgin.

“What is that?” asked d’Aguesseau with a strange glance from the image
to the devotee.

“A prayer,” replied le Bossu; “when I see danger I always offer a
prayer to our Lady.”

The Huguenot smiled contemptuously, but said no more, following his
host into the front room.

“It is yours,” said the hunchback. “You are weary; lie down until the
_pot-au-feu_ is ready, and we will sup together.”

“I have been in many places,” said d’Aguesseau, “and seen many
people--but never one like you before.”

Le Bossu smiled. “Yet--save for the hump--I am as others,” he said
quietly. “I hear some one crossing the court,” he added; “if any one
enters the shop, ’tis best for you to be quiet up here. There are some
who need not know I have a guest.”

“I trust I shall not imperil your safety by any carelessness,”
d’Aguesseau replied earnestly, casting a kindly glance at the drawn
face.

“I must go down,” said the cobbler. “Rest here awhile; I will call you
to supper.”

His guest thanked him, still much perplexed by this unusual
friendliness, and stood watching the hunchback as he went back to the
trap-door, and did not withdraw his eyes until his host disappeared
through the opening in the floor.

Le Bossu heard footsteps in the shop as he descended the stairs, and
leaning forward, saw Mère Tigrane in the kitchen door. Without a word
he went back and closed the trap, slipping the bolt; then he came down
to find la Louve in the kitchen.

“Where are my _sabots_, Petit Bossu?” she demanded, her fierce little
eyes travelling around the room, and her lips very red. “I came for
them myself, you are so slow.”

“You do not need them, Mère Tigrane,” the cobbler replied coolly, eying
her feet; “your _sabots_ are as good as new. I did not promise the
others until St. Bartholomew’s day.”

She began to grumble, moving over to the fire and peering into the
_pot-au-feu_.

“_Dame!_ but you live well, Charlot,” she remarked. “The sight of the
damned corpse gave me also an appetite. _Mère de Dieu!_ how white and
tender her flesh was! ’Twould have made a good pottage,” she added
laughing, her yellow teeth showing against her blood-red tongue like
the fangs of a she-wolf--verily, she merited her name.

“You should arrange with Adolphe,” the hunchback said coolly. “I will
send you your _sabots_ on Wednesday.”

“Eh! but I’ll come for them,” she replied with a wink; “I love to come
to visit you.”

The cobbler grunted, moving slowly and painfully--as he did at
times--to the shop. But Mère Tigrane was reluctant to follow him,--she
was listening; she thought she heard a step overhead.

“Charlot,” she said amiably, “how much do you get for your room above?”

“I do not rent it,” he replied calmly, but he too was listening.

Happily, the sounds above ceased.

“I want it,” she remarked briskly; “I will pay a good price for it--for
my cousin. He is apprenticed to the blacksmith behind the Garden of the
Récollets. I will look at it now--at once--Petit Bossu.”

The cobbler started, but controlled himself, though la Louve had her
foot on the ladder. She could be swift when she pleased, and she could
hobble.

“It is locked to-day,” he said coolly, “and I shall not rent it now.”

She grinned, with an evil look.

“What have you got there, _mon chéri_?” she demanded, shaking her cane
at him with sinister pleasantry.

“The devil,” replied le Bossu, sitting down to his bench and taking up
a shoe and beginning to stitch.

“Or his wife--which?” la Louve asked jocosely.

She was satisfied now that the trap was fastened, and it was not
always wise to offend the cobbler. She returned to the shop with a
dissatisfied face.

“You have no hospitality,” she said, “you dog of a cobbler--I will come
on Wednesday again for the _sabots_.”

“As you please,” he retorted indifferently, stitching away.

“_Diable!_ you sew like a woman,” she remarked. “You might better be
cutting my shoes out of the good wood, that does not split, than
making those silly things of leather!”

She lingered a little longer, but still he did not heed her, and at
last she hobbled off, picking up a basket of fish that she had left
on the doorstep. But she did not leave the court until she had looked
again and again at the upper window of the shop of Two Shoes. Yet she
saw nothing there but the white curtain fluttering in the breeze.

An hour later she was back at the market-place, grinning and selling
her fish. She was in time too, to hear the uproar when Adolphe, the
showman, found the false coin in his box. She pushed to the fore,
her red handkerchief conspicuous in the group, and her sharp eyes
recognized the country boy who had followed her in to see the damned
person. The showman was belching forth oaths and threats like the fiery
furnace that belched flames on Shadrach, Meshach, and Abed-nego. Mère
Tigrane’s eyes gleamed, and she pointed a long, bony finger at the poor
lad.

“He put it in, Adolphe,” she shrieked, with an oath. “I saw him, the
vagabond!”

Then she laughed and shook, clapping her hands to her sides. It was so
diverting--the uproar, and the protests of the peasant boy as he was
dragged off to jail with the rabble at his heels.

“_Dame!_” she said, “’twas worth a good half-crown.”




CHAPTER III

MADEMOISELLE’S SLIPPERS


The first day of the week Petit Bossu set his house in order. He swept
the floor of the shop and put a cold dinner on the kitchen table that
his guest might eat in his absence. Then he hung up his apron and
blouse and, putting on his worn brown coat, slipped the leather strap
of his wallet over his shoulder. Last he took a pair of slippers out of
a cupboard and examined them with loving care and honest pride in their
workmanship. They were small, high-heeled, blue slippers, daintily
lined with white silk, and with rosettes of blue ribbon on the square
toes. The little cobbler stroked them tenderly, fastened one bow more
securely, and putting them carefully in his green bag, set out on his
journey. It was early, and few people lounged in the streets, and le
Bossu passed unheeded through the Rue St. Antoine, and went out at
last at the Porte de France. His pace was always slow, and to-day he
limped a little, but he kept cheerfully on, turning his face toward St.
Césaire.

The highroad, white with dust, unrolled like a ribbon through a rugged
plain which lay southwest of Nîmes, stretching from the low range of
limestone mountains--the foothills of the Cévennes--on the north to
the salt marshes of the Mediterranean on the south. Rocks cropped up
on either side of the road; the country was wild and barren-looking,
although here and there were fig trees and vineyards, and farther west
was the fertile valley of the Vaunage. North of those limestone hills
lay the Cévennes, where since the Revocation of the Edict of Nantes the
poor Huguenot peasants were making their desperate fight for liberty
of conscience, against the might and the bigotry of Louis XIV. Their
leader, Laporte, was dead, but he had been succeeded by Jean Cavalier
and Roland, and revolt still raged in the caves and fastnesses of
the upper Cévennes, though Maréchal Montrevel and the Intendant of
Languedoc assured the king that they had wiped out the insurrection.
But the “Barbets” or “Camisards,” as they were called in derision,
though naming themselves “Enfants de Dieu,” kept up the fierce
death-struggle. Meanwhile the city of Nîmes was judiciously orthodox in
the presence of the dragoons, and many Huguenots went to mass rather
than suffer torture and death. Not every man is made for a martyr,
and there were terrors enough to awe the most heroic. The bodies of
Protestants who died in prison were exposed at fairs for a fee, or
dragged through the streets on hurdles to be burned, as a warning and
example to the misguided who still lived.

Yet the busy life of every day went on; people bought and sold and
got gain; others married and made feasts; children were born, to be
snatched from Huguenot parents and baptized into the old religion;
some men died and were buried, others were cast from the galleys, at
Marseilles, into the sea. Such was life in Nîmes in those old days when
the sign of Two Shoes hung over the humble shop on the Rue St. Antoine.

All this while le Bossu was trudging along the white road. He met many
country people now, bringing their vegetables and poultry to town,
and more than once he was saluted with the mocking cry, “Petit Bossu!”
He kept steadily on, however, taking no heed, his face pale from the
exertion, or the repression of his natural temper, which resented
insults and injury more keenly than most people of his condition, in an
age when the poor were as the beasts of the field to the upper classes.
Many thoughts were passing in the hunchback’s mind, but he dwelt
most upon the little blue slippers, and when he did, his brown eyes
softened, the drawn expression on his thin face relaxed.

“The _bon Dieu_ bless her,” he murmured; “to her I am not the hunchback
or the cobbler--to her I am poor Charlot, her humble friend. _Ciel!_ I
would die for mademoiselle.”

He toiled slowly on; passing the village of St. Césaire, he turned
sharply to the north, and walking through a grove of olive trees, came
in sight of a château that nestled on the crest of a little eminence
looking west toward the Vaunage. The sun shone on its white walls and
sloping roof, and sparkled on its window panes. The building was not
large, and it had a long, low wing at one side, the whole thrown
into sharp relief by its background of mulberry trees. The house was
partially closed, the wing showing green-shuttered windows, but the
main part was evidently occupied. On the southern side was the garden,
with high hedges of box, and toward this the cobbler turned his steps.
As he approached the wicket-gate, which was set in a lofty part of the
hedge, a dog began to bark furiously, and a black poodle dashed toward
him as he entered, but recognizing the visitor, she ceased barking and
greeted le Bossu with every demonstration of friendship.

“Ah, Truffe,” said the cobbler, gently, “where is your mistress? I have
brought her the blue slippers at last.”

As if she understood the question, the poodle turned and, wagging her
tail, led the way back between two rows of box toward the centre of
the garden. The dog and the cobbler came out into an open circle well
planted with rose bushes, that grew in wild profusion around the old
sundial. Here were white roses and pink, yellow and red, large and
small; and sweet and fragile they looked in the old garden, which was
but poorly kept despite the neat hedges. On a rustic seat in the midst
of the flowers sat a young girl, the sun shining on her fair hair, and
tingeing with brown the red and white of her complexion. Her face and
figure were charming, and she had almost the air of a child, dressed as
she was in white, her flaxen hair falling in two long braids over her
shoulders.

The dog began to bark again at the sight of her, running to her and
back to the hunchback to announce the arrival of a friend. She looked
up with a bright smile as the cobbler lifted his cap and laid down the
green bag on the seat at her side.

“Ah, Charlot, you have my slippers at last,” she exclaimed gayly, her
blue eyes full of kindness as she greeted her humble visitor.

“I have them, Mademoiselle Rosaline,” he replied, his worn face
lighting up, “and they are almost worthy of the feet that will wear
them.”

“Almost!” laughed mademoiselle, “you are a born courtier, Charlot--oh,
what dears!”

Le Bossu had opened his bag and drawn out the blue slippers, holding
them up for her admiration.

“They are pretty enough for a queen!” said Rosaline, taking them in her
hands and looking at them critically, with her head on one side.

“Oh, Charlot, I shall never forgive you if they do not fit!”

“They will fit like gloves, mademoiselle,” the shoemaker replied
complacently; “let me try them on for you.”

But she was not yet done with her examination.

“Where did you get the pattern for the rosettes?” she asked eagerly;
“truly, they are the prettiest I have seen.”

“I copied them after a pair from Paris, mademoiselle,” he replied, as
pleased as she at his own success. “The heels too are just like those
worn at Versailles.”

Mademoiselle Rosaline laughed softly.

“I told you that you were a courtier, Charlot,” she said; “but they say
that the king wears high red heels, because he is not tall.”

“But red heels would not please mademoiselle on blue shoes,” remarked
the hunchback, smiling.

“But, Charlot,” said she, with a mischievous gleam of fun in her eyes,
“if we must all be of the king’s religion, must we not all also wear
his red heels?”

The cobbler’s pale face grew sad again.

“Alas, mademoiselle,” he said, with a sigh, “to you ’tis a jest, but
to some--” he shook his head gravely, looking down at the little blue
slippers in her lap.

“What is the matter?” she asked quickly, the smile dying on her lips.
“Have they--been burning any one lately in Nîmes?”

“Nay, mademoiselle,” he replied, kneeling on one knee in the gravel
path, and taking the slippers off her small feet to try on the new ones.

“Come, come, Charlot--tell me,” persisted his patroness, scarcely
heeding the shoe that he was drawing on her right foot. “You are as
solemn as an owl this morning.”

“I will tell mademoiselle,” he rejoined, reverently arranging the
rosette and smoothing the white silk stocking around the slender ankle.
“Then she must not blame me if she is horrified.”

“She is often horrified,” interrupted Rosaline, with a soft little
laugh. “Go on, Charlot.”

“There was a fair on Saturday--mademoiselle knows, for I saw Babet
there buying a silk handkerchief--”

“Babet cannot stay away from a fair for her life,” mademoiselle
interpolated again.

“’Twas a very fine fair,” continued le Bossu, putting on the other
slipper. “There were many attractions, and the jailer--Zénon--had the
body of a damned woman there; Adolphe, the showman, exhibited it for
half a crown. She, the dead woman, was, they say, one of the Huguenot
prisoners from the Tour de Constance, and she died on her way here;
she was to be examined by M. de Bâville for some reason,--what, I know
not,--but she died on the road, and Zénon made much by the exhibition.”

Rosaline shuddered, the color fading from her cheeks.

“And you went to see that horrible, wicked spectacle, Charlot?” she
demanded, in open disgust.

“Mademoiselle knows I am a good Catholic,” replied the cobbler, meekly,
his eyes drooping before her look of disdain. “’Tis done for the good
of our souls--to show us the fate of these misguided people.”

“_Mon Dieu!_” ejaculated mademoiselle, softly.

Silence fell between them unbroken save by the soft sounds of summer,
the humming of the honey-bees, the murmur of the mulberry leaves
stirred by a light wind. Mademoiselle sat looking vacantly at her new
slippers, while the shoemaker still knelt on one knee watching her face
with that pathetic expression in his eyes that we see only in the look
of sufferers.

“That was not all I saw at the fair,” he went on at last. “In the tent
there was also--”

Rosaline made a gesture of disgust.

“I will hear no more!” she cried indignantly.

“This will not horrify you, mademoiselle,” he replied gently; “’tis
only the story of my new guest.”

Her face relaxed, partly because she saw that she had hurt the
hunchback’s feelings.

“Well, you may tell me,” she said reluctantly.

“There was a young man there--in that tent-- Nay, mademoiselle, I
will say nothing more of it.” Le Bossu broke off, and then went on
carefully: “He was in great anguish, and I saw that he was watched by
a wicked old woman and one of the dragoons. I got him away to my house,
and there I found he had no money, except one piece, and was in great
trouble. He is--” the cobbler looked about keenly at the hedges, then
he lowered his voice, “a Huguenot.”

“And what did you do with him?” Rosaline demanded eagerly.

“He is in my upper room now,” replied the hunchback, “but I do not
know where he will go. He is not safe in Nîmes. I think he wants
to join the Barbets, but, of course, he tells me nothing. He is a
gentleman, mademoiselle, le Bossu knows, and very poor, like many of
the Huguenots, and proud. I know no more, except that he was reckless
enough to tell me his name.”

“What is it?” she asked, all interest now, and more than ever forgetful
of her new slippers.

“François d’Aguesseau,” he answered, in an undertone, with another
cautious glance behind him.

“’Tis all very strange,” remarked mademoiselle, regarding the worn
face thoughtfully. “You are a good Catholic, Charlot, yet you imperil
yourself to shelter a Huguenot.”

“The risk to me is very little,” he replied with great simplicity. “I
am too humble for M. de Bâville, and how could I give him up? He is
a kind young man, and in trouble; ah, mademoiselle, I also have had
troubles. May the _bon Dieu_ forgive me if I do wrong.”

“I do not think you do wrong, Charlot,” she said gently, “and I am sure
the _bon Dieu_ forgives you; but M. de Bâville will not.”

“I can die but once, mademoiselle,” he rejoined smiling.

“Why is it you always smile at death?” she asked.

“Ah, mademoiselle, you are not as I am,” he said quietly. “Death to
me--the gates of Paradise stand open--suffering over--poverty no more!”

Tears gathered in Rosaline’s blue eyes.

“Do you suffer much now?” she asked.

“Nearly always,” he replied.

Again there was a painful silence. Then le Bossu recollected the
slippers and rearranged the rosettes.

“They fit like gloves, mademoiselle,” he said calmly, “do they give you
comfort?”

The girl roused herself.

“They are beautiful, Charlot,” she replied, standing up and pacing to
and fro before the bench, to try them. “They do not even feel like new
shoes. You are a magician.”

She had lifted her white skirts to show the two little blue feet. Le
Bossu stood up too, admiring not only the slippers, but the beautiful
face and the golden hair, as fair as the sunshine. Even Truffe, the
poodle, danced about in open approval. Then they heard a sharp voice
from the direction of the house.

“Mademoiselle! Mademoiselle Rosaline!” it called; “the dinner grows
cold, and Madame de St. Cyr is waiting. _Viens donc!_”

“Poor Babet!” laughed Rosaline; “I am her torment. Come to the house,
Charlot; she will have a dinner for you also, and grandmother will be
delighted with these beautiful slippers. Come, Truffe, you at least are
hungry, you little _gourmande_.”




CHAPTER IV

ROSALINE


The sun shone cheerfully in the dining room of the château. The long
windows were open, and the soft June air came in, laden with the
sweetness of the garden. The room was of moderate size and furnished
with perfect simplicity, the polished dark wood floor being bare of
rugs. In the corner was a tall clock with a silver dial, wherein were
set the sun, moon, and stars, moving in unison with the hands. On the
sideboard were a few pieces of silver that dated back to the days of
Francis I. The table, covered with a fair linen cloth, was set for two,
a glass bowl full of pansies in the centre. Rosaline sat at one end
and at the other was her grandmother, Madame de St. Cyr. Between them
was Truffe, the poodle, sitting solemnly, with a napkin tied about her
neck, and turning her black face from one to the other in eager but
subdued anticipation.

Madame de St. Cyr was an old gentlewoman with a handsome, delicate face
and the blue eyes of her granddaughter; her hair had the whiteness of
snow and there were lines of age and suffering about her mouth. She
wore a plain gown of black silk with a fall of lace at the throat,
and a lace cap on her head, and her thin white hands showed the blue
veins like whip-cords, but they were slender and graceful hands, with
tapering fingers and delicate wrists.

The two women were alone; their only servant, the woman Babet, was in
the kitchen, setting out a dinner for the cobbler, and they could hear
the murmur of her voice as she lectured him. Madame de St. Cyr was
listening to Rosaline with a troubled face.

“Ah, _grand’mère_, can we not help him?” the girl said earnestly.
“Think of his desolate situation.”

“We are poor, Rosaline,” the old woman replied gently, “and helpless.
Moreover, if our religion were suspected the _bon Dieu_ only knows what
would happen. I am too old to hide away in the caves of the Cévennes!
Nor is it clear that it is my duty to help this fellow religionist if
by so doing I put you in danger. Ah, my child, for you it would be the
Tour de Constance--or worse!”

Rosaline was feeding some morsels to Truffe with perfect composure.

“I have never been afraid, _grand’mère_,” she said, “and I hate to live
a lie--but I know you are wise. Yet, oh, madame, think of this Huguenot
in Nîmes!”

“What did Charlot call him?” her grandmother asked thoughtfully. “I
thought the name was familiar.”

“He said ’twas François d’Aguesseau.”

Madame de St. Cyr sat a moment silent, trying to gather her
recollections in shape, then her memory suddenly helped her.

“Certainly I know,” she said; “they are from Dauphiné. He must be the
son of Sieur d’Aguesseau who was broken on the wheel at Montpellier in
’99. I remember now very well; he had a son and a daughter, and I did
hear that she was carried away to the Tour de Constance. It must have
been the same young woman whose corpse was exhibited on Saturday at
Nîmes. The song is true,” she added sadly:

  “‘Nos filles dans les monastères,
    Nos prisonniers dans les cachots,
  Nos martyrs dont le sang se répand à grands flots,
    Nos confesseurs sur les galères,
    Nos malades persécutés,
  Nos mourants exposés à plus d’une furie,
    Nos morts traînés à la voierie,
    Te disent (ô Dieu!) nos calamités.’”

“What a terrible story of sorrow it is!” remarked Rosaline; “and
to think that the corpse of a gentlewoman should be exposed in the
market-place! _Mon Dieu!_ I wonder if mine will be!”

Madame put up her hand with a gesture of horror.

“Hush!” she said, with white lips, “I cannot bear it.”

Rosaline was contrite in a moment.

“A thousand pardons, _grand’mère_,” she said sweetly; “you and I have
lived so long the life of concealed Huguenots, treading on the edge of
the volcano, that I grow careless in speech.”

“But do you not see why I am so reluctant to take a risk?” her
grandmother asked. “Yet I know that this François d’Aguesseau is
related to me through his mother. I remember now who she was, and it
seems that I must do what I can.”

Her granddaughter’s face lighted. “That is like you, madame,” she said
brightly; “we could not believe she would turn a deaf ear, could we,
Truffe? Ah, you _petite gourmande_, have I not given you enough?”

The older woman watched the girl fondly as she fed and petted the dog.
This granddaughter was her last link with the world. Her son, the
Comte de St. Cyr had fallen fighting for the king the year before the
Revocation of the Edict of Nantes, when Rosaline was only three months
old. His wife survived him only two years, and the grandmother brought
up the child. They had never been rich, and the estate had suffered
under madame’s management, for she was always cheated and robbed, being
as unworldly as a woman could be who had seen something of the gay life
of her day. Her mind now was full of the guest of le Bossu, and she was
troubled.

“I do not know what we can do, Rosaline,” she said in evident
perplexity; “he can come here, of course, and share our crust, if he
will, but a guest, and an unknown one, would excite comment; and there
is M. de Baudri.”

Rosaline made a grimace. “I wish M. de Baudri would stay with his
dragoons in Nîmes,” she retorted. “But, _grand’mère_, there must be a
way. Let us think and think, until we find it.”

“I cannot understand Charlot,” remarked Madame, meditatively. “We know
he is a devout Romanist, yet this is not the first time I have known
him to help the persecuted.”

“He is the strangest little man in the world,” replied Rosaline, “and
I believe that his heart is as big as his poor misshapen body. He is
strangely refined too, for his condition in life. Poor little Charlot!”

“Do you think he suspects our religion?” madame asked anxiously.

“I do not know,” her granddaughter replied slowly, “but sometimes I
think so.”

“_Mon Dieu!_” murmured the old woman, with a sigh; “the axe hangs over
our heads.”

Rosaline looked up surprised.

“Surely you do not fear Charlot?” she exclaimed. “Charlot!--why, he
would no more betray us than would old Babet.”

“Babet is of the Religion; I trust no one else,” returned Madame de St.
Cyr, gravely.

“I do,” replied Rosaline calmly; “I trust Charlot and Père Ambroise.”

“In a way, we are in Père Ambroise’s hands,” her grandmother replied,
“and I do not believe he would betray you; he means instead to convert
you. As for me, I am too near death to trouble him.”

“You do him an injustice,” retorted Rosaline; and then she smiled. “The
good father is naturally kind,--he cannot help it; he is so round and
sleek that he rolls through the world as easily as a ball. To strike
anything violently would make him bounce uncomfortably, so dear old
Père Ambroise rolls blandly on. I should weep indeed if the naughty
Camisards caught the kind soul and harmed him. I can see him, though,
trying to run away, with his round eyes starting and his fat cheeks
quivering like Babet’s moulds of jelly; and how short his breath
would come! _Mon père_ is my friend, so do not find fault with him,
_grand’mère_, even when he tries to convert me,--pretending all the
while that he believes me to be one of his flock!”

Madame de St. Cyr laughed a little at the picture the girl drew of Père
Ambroise, but the laugh died in a sigh. She had all the misgivings,
the faint-heartedness of age, while Rosaline was as full of life and
spirits as a child, and as thoughtless of the dreadful fate that
might any day overtake her. She laughed now and told Truffe to beg
for a tart, and then scolded the poodle for eating sweets, all the
while making a picture of youthful loveliness that made the old room
bright with hope and joy. The finger of fate had not yet been laid on
Rosaline’s heart; she knew neither love nor fear.




CHAPTER V

THE COBBLER’S GUEST


In the upper room of the shop of Two Shoes sat a desperate man. The
sun did not shine for François d’Aguesseau, and in the little court
off the Rue St. Antoine there were no honey-bees to fill the June air
with their cheerful hum, and no flowers except the blooming weed that
had sprung up between the flagstones. The good woman in the house
opposite had a couple of children, who were playing on her doorstep;
the sign of the Two Shoes squeaked a little as it swung in the gentle
breeze; these were the only sounds, though the busy life of Nîmes was
flowing through the thoroughfare at the mouth of the court. But the
Huguenot considered none of these things. He sat alone in the cobbler’s
house, his elbows leaning on the table before him, his head on his
hands. His body was in Nîmes, but his soul was away in Dauphiné. When
he closed his eyes he saw the valley of the Durance and the old town
of Embrun, where his childish feet had made so many journeys that he
might look up in wonder at the Tour Brune or rest in the parvis of the
Cathedral,--for his family had not always been Protestants. Then he
saw in his vision the château near Embrun where he was born, and the
terrace where he and his sister Hélène had played together,--the same
Hélène whose body lay exposed at the bazar on Saturday. She was only a
woman, but she had died for her religion and he had escaped; through no
fault of his, though, for he had been reckless enough of life in his
efforts to rescue her. He had tried to move heaven and earth for her,
and had not even obtained a hearing in Paris. Fate, the inexorable,
had closed every avenue of mercy; the young and innocent woman had
languished in the pestilential atmosphere of the Tour de Constance,
had died at last to be subjected to degradation after death by her
unmerciful jailers. It was over at last, her body had been publicly
burned, and there remained no longer any reason for him to linger in
Nîmes. His mother, dying of a broken heart over the fates of husband
and daughter, had made him solemnly promise to leave France forever. In
England he would find relatives, and there too his father had wisely
invested a small sum of money against the evil day when they might have
to quit Dauphiné. Therefore François was not quite penniless, though
the State had comfortably seized all his lands and his goods. But he
was, at the moment, without money or means of communicating with his
English friends. The Huguenots were closely watched, and it was no
light thing to escape. Moreover, he longed to strike a blow for his
religion, for liberty, before he left his native land. His promise
bound him, yet could he not linger long enough to serve the cause in
some way? A strange fascination held him in Nîmes where he had suffered
so much; not only did he lack money to pay his way to the sea-coast,
but he lacked also the desire to go. Languedoc had been fatal to two
of his family, yet he lingered, casting his eyes toward the Cévennes.
Ah, to strike a good blow to revenge his father and sister! He was no
saint, and in the upper room over the shop he ground his teeth in his
rage and despair. _Dieu!_ had he not seen the body of his innocent
sister exhibited for half a crown? the body of his father broken on the
wheel at Montpellier? He thought with grim satisfaction of the terrible
death of the archpriest Du Chayla at Pont-de-Montvert in ’72. The
enraged peasantry of the surrounding country, having endured terrible
persecutions at the hands of the archpriest, rose and attacking his
house in the night slew him with fifty-two blows. D’Aguesseau recalled
the circumstance now and thought of de Bâville the Intendant of
Languedoc, and of Montrevel, who was directing the army in its efforts
to crush the Camisards. But the young Huguenot did not come of the
blood of assassins. Doubtless, it would be a service to his religion to
strike down either of these men, and die for it afterwards, but he was
not made to creep upon a victim in the dark or lie in wait for him at
some unexpected moment. He could join Cavalier or Roland, but he could
not do the murderer’s work in Nîmes, though his soul was darkened by
his afflictions.

He reflected, too, on the kindness of the shoemaker. He had recklessly
placed himself at the hunchback’s mercy, yet no advantage had
been taken of his admission. It was a crime to conceal or shelter
a Huguenot, yet the humble little cobbler showed no fear, but
courageously offered his friendship to a proscribed criminal,--for it
was criminal to be of any religion except the king’s. The charity of
the poor cripple softened d’Aguesseau’s heart; he suppressed his sneer
when he saw the taper burning in front of the Virgin. It was Romish
idolatry, he said to himself, but the idolater was also a Christian.
Nor would he be a charge upon the kind shoemaker; he had been now
two nights and nearly two days his guest, and he must relieve him of
such a burden. He could repay him if he ever reached England, but he
cared little whether he reached it or not. His enforced idleness, too,
wrought upon him; he was a strong, active man, and he could not endure
this sitting still and waiting an opportunity. He had been brought up
for the army, but no Huguenots were wanted in the army, and he had not
the instinct of a merchant. He intended to go to England or Holland
and enter the service of one State or the other. But first--while he
was waiting for the chance to quit the country--why not go into the
Cévennes? The temptation was upon him and he well-nigh forgot his
pledge to quit France.

As the afternoon advanced, he left the little room over the shop and
descended into the kitchen. He did not eat the dinner that le Bossu
had set out for him; he had gone fasting too often of late to feel
the loss of regular meals, and he could not eat with relish food for
which he could not pay. He went out through the shop, creating no
little excitement in the neighboring houses as he crossed the court and
entered the Rue St. Antoine. He had been closely housed since Saturday,
and freedom was sweet. He stood a moment looking about at the groups
of chattering townspeople, and then he turned his steps toward the
Garden of the Récollets. It was nearly five o’clock and the shadows
were lengthening on the west side of the streets, and he heard the
church bells ringing as though there were peace and good-will on earth.
A rag-picker was at work at the mouth of an alley, some dirty children
were playing in the kennel, and a boy with a basket of figs on his
head was crying the price as he went along. It was an ordinary street
scene, busy and noisy, and d’Aguesseau brushed against a Jesuit priest
as he walked on past the Cathedral of St. Castor.

Full of his own gloomy thoughts he went from street to street, and was
only aroused at last by finding himself nearly opposite a tavern--which
bore the sign of the Golden Cup--and in the midst of an uproar. The
doors and windows of the public house were crowded, and a rabble came
up the street with jeers and cries and laughter. D’Aguesseau drew back
into the shelter of a friendly doorway and waited the approach of the
_canaille_, and it was not long before the excitement was explained.
The street was not very wide, and the crowds seemed to choke it up
as they advanced; and a little ahead of the rabble came a chain of
prisoners driven along by the whips of their guards and pelted with
stones and offal by the spectators. The criminals were fastened in
pairs by short chains, each having a ring in the centre; then a long
heavy chain was passed through these rings, thus securing the pairs in
a long double column. There were fifty men thus fastened; twenty-five
on one side, and twenty-five on the other, and between, the cruel
iron chain; each man bearing a weight of a hundred and fifty pounds,
though they were of all ages and conditions, from the beardless boy
to the veteran bowed with years. It was a gang going to the galleys
at Marseilles, and there were thieves, murderers, and Huguenots; the
latter especially and fatally distinguished by red-jackets that they
might be the mark of every stone and every insult of the bystanders.
Like the exposure of the corpses of damned persons, the chain was a
moral lesson for the people, and especially for the recalcitrants.

As the unfortunates approached, women leaned from the windows to cry
out at them, and even the children cast mud and stones. D’Aguesseau
looked on sternly; he did not know how soon he might be of that number,
and he counted forty-two red-jackets. The leaders came on stubbornly;
they were two strong men of middle age, and they bore the chain with
grim fortitude, but the two who followed were pitiful enough,--a
white-haired man, who limped painfully and was near the end of his
journey, and a boy with a red streak on each cheek, and the rasping
cough of a consumptive. The next pair were also red-jackets; both were
lame. The fourth couple walked better; the fifth had to be lashed
up by the guards. They were hailed with laughter and derision; the
convicts received sympathy, the Huguenots were pelted so vigorously
that the blood flowed from more than one wound, as the keepers whipped
them into the stable-yard of the Golden Cup, with the rabble at their
heels. The chain would be fastened in the stable, while the guards
took some refreshments, and here was an opportunity, therefore, for
the population to enjoy some innocent diversion. A Huguenot prisoner
and a dancing bear served much the same purpose. The street was nearly
cleared, so many crowded into the inn-yard, and the sounds of merriment
rose from within.

D’Aguesseau was turning away in stern disgust, when he came face to
face with a hideous old woman, with a string of fish in her hand. She
had been gloating over the chain, and she was smiling amiably still,
running her very red tongue along the edge of her red lips. She
curtsied to François and held out her fish.

“A bargain, monsieur,” she said pleasantly. “The sight of the
red-jackets makes Mère Tigrane feel good; the fish are cheap.”

He shook his head, making an effort to pass her, but she persisted.

“One fish, monsieur,” she protested,--“a mountain trout. _Dame!_ ’tis
fresh, caught this morning. The spectacle of these Huguenots has made
monsieur hungry.”

“My good woman, I want neither fish nor fowl,” d’Aguesseau said
impatiently.

“Monsieur makes a mistake,” she persisted with a grin; “these are good
fish, caught in the stream where they drowned a Camisard witch last
week!”

With a suppressed exclamation he thrust her aside and walked on, her
shrill laughter in his ears, and the cries of the rabble in the yard
of the Golden Cup. As for Mère Tigrane, she stood a moment looking
longingly at the inn; could she forego the diversion? Finally, she
decided between two attractions, and quietly followed D’Aguesseau.

The next day, when François descended from his room, he heard voices in
the shop, and saw that the cobbler was talking to two women. One was
tall, raw-boned, and grim-faced, with iron-gray hair and keen black
eyes, and wore the dress of an upper servant; the other was one of the
most charming young girls he had ever seen. He stood in the kitchen
undecided whether to retire or to quietly admire the picture, but
before he could determine upon his proper course le Bossu called him.

“Come in, monsieur,” he said; “Mademoiselle de St. Cyr would speak to
you.”

François responded with some surprise, and bowed in reply to Rosaline’s
curtsey.

“M. d’Aguesseau,” she said, blushing a little under his glance, “my
_grand’mère_, Madame de St. Cyr desires to see you, being acquainted
with your family,--she knew your mother.”

His eyes lighted with surprise and pleasure.

“Madame de St. Cyr does me much honor to request a visit,
mademoiselle,” he replied; “I am at her service.”

Rosaline and Babet had been into Nîmes to shop, and they were ready to
go. The young girl laid her hand on the older woman’s arm.

“Then we will expect you to-morrow afternoon, monsieur,” she said
quietly; “my very good friend Charlot will direct you to St. Cyr, and
madame my _grand’mère_ will be pleased to make you welcome.”

M. d’Aguesseau murmured his acknowledgments, while he aided Babet in
gathering up numerous small packages, and then the two women bade
Charlot _adieu_ and departed,--the drawn face of the cobbler clouding
as Rosaline left, as though the sun were obscured. The younger man
turned from the door with an exclamation.

“Who is that angel?” he demanded eagerly.

Le Bossu was stitching a shoe, his fingers shaking a little as he
thrust the needle into the stubborn leather.

“Mademoiselle Rosaline de St. Cyr,” he replied quietly, his brown eyes
searching his guest with a new sternness. “You had better retire,
monsieur, there comes one of the Franciscan fathers for his shoes.”




CHAPTER VI

A MILITARY SUITOR


A week had passed and the afternoon sun was shining red on the windows
of St. Cyr, while the shadows lengthened in the rambling old garden.
Rosaline was feeding her doves beside the sundial, Truffe sitting
on the rustic bench in disgrace because she had made a dash at the
feathered pets who came cooing to the young girl’s feet. It was a
picture that the sunshine touched with tender radiance; behind was the
dark green hedge, the blooming roses, and in the circle by the dial the
doves were flocking to take food from their mistress, whose fair face
was as softly colored as the roses, and her hair showing its loveliest
tints of gold. She talked to her pets while she fed them.

“There, there! Marguerite, you have had more than your share; you are
as great a _gourmande_ as the naughty Truffe,” she said, shaking her
finger at one pretty bird. “_Viens donc_, my Condé! Here is a crumb
for you, sweetheart. As for Mademoiselle d’Hautefort, she shall have
nothing if she pushes so against Corneille. What a lot of little
rogues!”

She had distributed all her crumbs and the doves were fluttering over
them, struggling for the largest fragments, and even alighting on her
wrists and hands in their eagerness. Truffe meanwhile sulked under her
punishment, her bright black eyes watching the birds with malicious
longing for vengeance.

“You pretty creatures, how I love you!” said Rosaline, caressing the
two doves she had gathered into her arms. “Look at them, Truffe, and be
ashamed of your evil thoughts. Nay, do not deny them, madame; can I not
read your eyes? You would eat them, you wicked ogress, I see it! Ah,
there--you are raising your ears; what is it, _ma chérie_?”

The dog not only pointed her ears, she began to bark, looking back
toward the house, but not daring to spring from the seat where she had
been ordered to remain until pardoned.

“You hear a step on the gravel, Truffe, and so do I,” said Rosaline
listening. “Maybe it is the--new steward.”

Truffe barked again and then uttered a low growl of displeasure as
a man turned the corner of the hedge and came into view. He was
moderately tall, with a handsome figure, which was arrayed in the
height of fashion; his coat of uncut velvet was laced with gold, and he
wore red heels on his high riding-boots, and his waistcoat and trousers
were of satin. His full, curled periwig was fresh from Paris like the
little hat, which was covered with feathers. He made Mademoiselle de
St. Cyr a wonderful bow and then looked at her in open admiration, his
blue eyes sparkling and his white teeth showing as he smiled.

“A dove in the midst of doves,” he said with gallantry; “mademoiselle
is ever the fairest rose in her garden.”

“M. de Baudri makes very pretty compliments,” Rosaline replied, her
smiling composure unruffled. “Truffe and I did not know he had honored
St. Cyr with a visit.”

“I have been half an hour with madame,” he replied, “all the while
hoping to catch a glimpse of the loveliest face in the world.”

“I would have sent Truffe, if I had known that you desired to see her,
monsieur,” Rosaline replied demurely.

Monsieur bit his lip; he hated dogs and the provoking little witch knew
it.

“Mademoiselle chooses to mock me,” he said, “and mockery comes
unnaturally from such lovely lips.”

Rosaline laughed softly, still caressing a dove that nestled on her arm.

“Tell me the news from Nîmes, monsieur,” she retorted lightly; “I love
a good story, you know.”

“With all my heart, mademoiselle, if you will love the story teller,”
he replied.

“I cannot judge until I have heard the story,” she retorted,
mischievous mirth in her blue eyes.

“There is not so much to tell, mademoiselle,” he said; “these
wretches--the Camisards--still trouble us despite their defeat at
Vagnas. If we could get the head of the brigand Cavalier all would
be well. Has mademoiselle heard of M. le Maréchal’s dinner party?
’Tis amusing enough. M. Montrevel is in a bad humor; the villain
Cavalier has cut up two detachments, as you know,--one at Ners, and
one intended for Sommières. Thinking of these things and drinking
wine--after dinner--M. le Maréchal was angry, and at the moment came
tidings that these heretics were praying and howling in a mill on the
canal, outside of the Porte-des-Carmes. _Mère de Dieu!_ you should have
seen Montrevel. In a trice he had out a regiment of foot, and away he
went to the mill. The soldiers surrounded it and broke open the door,
and there sure enough were a lot of psalm-singers, about three hundred
old men, women, and children--heretics all! The soldiers went in--ah,
mademoiselle does not desire particulars; but truly it is slow work to
cut three hundred throats, especially in such confusion. M. le Maréchal
ordered them to fire the mill. _Mon Dieu!_ ’twas a scene! It burned
artistically, and the soldiers drove back all who tried to escape. One
rogue, M. Montrevel’s own servant too, saved a girl, but the maréchal
ordered them both hung at once. He was begged off by some sisters of
mercy, who unhappily came by just as they had the noose over his head,
but the heretic had been hung already. ’Tis called M. Montrevel’s
dinner party in Nîmes; and there is a saying that one must burn three
hundred heretics before M. le Maréchal has an appetite.”

Rosaline stood stroking the dove, her eyes averted.

“What a pleasant story, monsieur,” she remarked coldly, “to tell out
here in the warm sunshine! What do I want to know of those wretches
dying in the flames?” and she flashed a sudden look of scorn upon him
that brought a flush to his face.

“Mademoiselle should have asked me to tell her the one story that I
know by heart,” he replied, his voice and manner changing in an instant
and full now of courtesy and propitiation.

“And what is that, monsieur?” she asked shortly; the color was warm in
her cheeks and her blue eyes flashed dangerously.

“The old story of my love for you, Rosaline,” he said eagerly,
advancing nearer the sundial, the flock of doves rising with a whir of
wings as he approached.

She was unmoved, however, only averting her face.

“I have spoken to madame,” he added, “and now I speak to you.”

“And what did Madame de St. Cyr say?” she demanded, giving him a
questioning glance.

“She told me that so great was her love for her only grandchild that
she would never force your choice, and therefore it remained with you
to decide for yourself.” He spoke with feeling, his bold blue eyes
on her lovely face. “I trust that you are not wholly indifferent to
me, Rosaline,” he continued, “and I can give you much. My beautiful
princess is shut up here in a ruinous old château. I will show you the
world--Paris--Versailles. No beauty of the court will compare with the
rose of Languedoc.”

He paused, carried away by his own eloquence, for M. de Baudri was not
given to sentiment. Rosaline had listened with patience and composure,
and she answered him in a tone of quiet amusement.

“Monsieur does me too much honor,” she said. “The château is indeed
ruinous, but ’tis my home, and, strange to say, I do not long for the
splendors of the court--or the flattery of the courtiers.”

“But my love for you, mademoiselle!” he protested in surprise; surely
this child did not realize the honor he paid her. “I offer you my heart
and hand.”

Rosaline curtsied with a smile on her lips.

“I am honored, monsieur,” she replied; “but happily, as my grandmother
says, I have the decision of my fate. My marriage matters to no one
except to her and to me--and, monsieur, I do not desire to marry.”

He stared at her in such frank surprise that she had to avert her face
to hide her amusement.

“You are only a child,” he said bluntly; “you do not understand what my
name and fortune would mean to you. ’Tis not every day, mademoiselle,
that a man desires to marry a young girl without a _dot_!”

She laughed softly, her blue eyes shining.

“I appreciate your condescension, monsieur,” she said amiably; “but I
am too wise to thrust myself upon such rash generosity.”

“This is folly, mademoiselle,” he exclaimed, his temper rising; “or is
it only a shamefaced reluctance to confess your true sentiments?”

Rosaline had borne much, but at this she broke down, laughing as
merrily and recklessly as a child; laughing until tears stood in her
blue eyes. Meanwhile M. de Baudri stood in front of her swelling with
rage and mortification, his face crimson and his blue eyes fierce with
indignation. Still Rosaline laughed.

“Mademoiselle is merry,” he said stiffly.

“I beg your pardon, monsieur,” she replied, “a thousand times.”

“You have not answered me,” he went on harshly. “Am I to understand
that my suit is refused?”

“It is refused, monsieur,” she rejoined more calmly; “M. de Baudri
should seek a bride of more wealth and distinction.”

He stood a moment silent, the picture of furious indignation, then he
looked over the hedge and saw a man crossing the space between the
house and the wing. M. de Baudri frowned.

“Who is that, mademoiselle?” he demanded sharply, pointing toward the
stranger.

Rosaline’s eyes followed his finger, and she colored, her composure
disturbed at last.

“It is the new steward, monsieur,” she replied.

“The new steward?” he repeated. “Madame de St. Cyr refused the man
I recommended because she said she could not afford to pay for a
successor to old Jacques.”

“That is true,” she rejoined quietly; “we really could not afford it.
But since old Jacques died we have found ourselves in need of a man to
help us, therefore we have afforded it, monsieur.”

“Humph!” ejaculated M. de Baudri, with another glance at the house.
“A strange sort of a steward. You had best be careful, mademoiselle,
and not employ disguised Camisards; the neighborhood swarms with the
vermin, and M. le Maréchal means to exterminate them all.”

“I thank you for the caution, monsieur,” she replied, “but Père
Ambroise looks after us very well.”

“Père Ambroise is a fat fool,” he retorted, giving a malicious kick at
Truffe, who had approached him.

Rosaline saw it and her face flushed crimson.

“Come here, Truffe,” she said, and then curtsied to her visitor. “We
bid you good afternoon, monsieur,” she continued coolly; “neither
Truffe nor I appreciate the honor you have offered us. We beg you to
confer it on a more worthy object, and we bid you good-evening.”

And away she ran with her dog, leaving M. de Baudri standing in the
centre of the garden, the image of indignant disgust. The minx had
dared to refuse him, an officer of his Majesty’s dragoons, when she
should have been overwhelmed by his condescension; but clearly she was
not responsible,--a frivolous child! So he thought, and rode away,
cursing his folly and the infatuation of Madame de St. Cyr. But, for
all that, he did not mean to lose the Rose of Languedoc.




CHAPTER VII

A STRING OF TROUT


The next morning Rosaline was once more among her flowers. There was no
gardener at the château now, and it was the young girl’s custom to weed
and tend her own flower beds. She was bending over some velvet-faced
pansies, snipping off the dead blooms and plucking away the vagrant
grass when she heard some one speak behind her, and looking up saw
a hideous face peeping over the wicket-gate. Rosaline started and
stood erect, viewing her visitor with a suspicious glance. But Mère
Tigrane--for it was she--was accustomed to such receptions, and she
only grinned more widely as she dropped mademoiselle a curtsey.

“Have some fish for dinner, my pretty!” she said in a coaxing tone,
holding up a string of trout; “mademoiselle can have the whole string
for ten sous!”

Rosaline had no thought except one of horror and repulsion. The face
looking over the gate, with its wide red mouth and yellow fangs,
alarmed her; she did not even look at the fish.

“I do not want anything, my good woman,” she replied, shaking her head.

“But ’tis fast day, my darling,” remarked Mère Tigrane, with tender
solicitude; “all good Catholics eat fish to-day!”

Rosaline’s lesson was well learned and she was on her guard in a moment.

“We have enough fish,” she said coldly.

“But these are so fresh, mademoiselle,” persisted la Louve. “But then
the young lady cannot judge; permit poor Mère Tigrane to show these
lovely trout to the cook.”

“I tell you that we have more fish than we can eat,” said Rosaline,
haughtily; “you had better try elsewhere.”

“But think of the bargain, my dear,” rejoined the old hag, in honeyed
tones; “now the cook will know--or the steward.”

As she spoke Mère Tigrane gently opened the gate and entered, to
Rosaline’s disgust. She instinctively feared the fishwife and she did
not want her to approach the house. She moved, therefore, into the
centre of the path, blocking the way,--a very bad move, indeed, for it
roused all la Louve’s suspicions.

“Now, my dearie, let me sell these pretty fish in the kitchen,” she
coaxed, approaching the girl and laying her bony hand on Rosaline’s
skirt.

Mademoiselle drew back with horror, dragging her frock from the talon
fingers with a little involuntary cry of disgust. As she did so there
was a low growl from the hedge and Truffe, dashing suddenly upon the
scene, sprang on Mère Tigrane. The old woman shrieked, snatching a
knife from her bosom and striking at the dog.

“Do not dare to hurt Truffe!” cried Rosaline, throwing herself on the
poodle and dragging her off before she had done more mischief than to
tear the other’s clothes. “Go!” she added imperiously, stamping her
foot; “you forced yourself in--and see, I cannot hold the dog! There is
a crown to buy you a new petticoat; take it and go!”

Mère Tigrane gathered up the money greedily, and prudently retired
beyond the gate before she spoke. Her little eyes glittered with rage,
although she smiled broadly at the young girl.

“Mademoiselle is generous,” she said; “she has more than paid for the
fish--will she not have them?”

Rosaline was annoyed beyond endurance. She still held the dog and she
turned a withering glance on Mère Tigrane.

“Go!” she said sharply, “at once. Let me hear no more of you or your
fish.”

“_Mère de Dieu_, but my beauty can be angry!” remarked la Louve.
“Farewell, my pretty, and good luck to you and your dog.”

The old woman made her another curtsey and still chuckling to herself
walked slowly away.

Scarcely had she disappeared behind the tall hedge when there was a
footstep on the path behind Rosaline and François d’Aguesseau came in
sight. He was soberly dressed like a steward, and bare-headed, having
hurried from the house at the sound of Mère Tigrane’s outcry. He found
Rosaline still holding the dog, her face flushed with anger and her
eyes fastened on the opening in the hedge where her unpleasant visitor
had disappeared.

“I heard a noise, mademoiselle,” he said, “and thought something had
alarmed you.”

“And something did,” replied Rosaline, with a shudder; “the most
dreadful old woman has been here trying to force her way into the
house.”

D’Aguesseau smiled; old women did not terrify him, and he set
mademoiselle’s excitement down to her nerves.

“What sort of an old woman?” he asked pleasantly; “you look as if you
had seen a witch, mademoiselle.”

“And so I have,” retorted the girl; “a witch with a string of fish.”

He started; he too had unpleasant associations with an apparition with
a basket of fish. He remembered the terrible tent at the fair, and the
encounter opposite the Sign of the Golden Cup.

“Which way did she go?” he asked, and as Rosaline pointed, he went
to the gate, and looked in both directions but saw nothing. “She has
vanished,” he said reassuringly. “I trust that she did not annoy you,
mademoiselle.”

“She was teasing me to buy her fish, and finally pushed into the
garden,” Rosaline replied, “and then she caught hold of my skirt in
her eagerness to arrest my attention. I was foolish, I know, but, I
couldn’t help it, I cried out--such a horror came over me! Then Truffe
sprang on her, and she drew a knife on my dog! I saved Truffe and
ordered her away, but I know she was fearfully angry, and--and I fear
her; I can’t tell why, but I fear her!”

“Put her from your thoughts, mademoiselle,” he said soothingly; “’tis
not in the power of such a wretched creature to hurt you.”

“I do not know,” she replied, still excited; “we are concealing so
much, and she wanted to get to the house. I was afraid she would see--”
she broke off, her face flushing.

“See me,” finished d’Aguesseau quietly. “Mademoiselle, I pray that you
will not let my presence add to your anxieties. I fear I have indeed
exposed this house to peril by accepting Madame de St. Cyr’s beautiful
friendship. If I believed so, I would quit it at once. My lot would
indeed be a miserable one if I should bring misfortune to the roof that
shelters me.”

He spoke gloomily, standing with folded arms and bent head, his eyes on
the ground. Rosaline loosened her hold on Truffe, who wriggled herself
free and fled away along the hedge barking angrily. Neither of them
heeded the poodle, however, for their thoughts were of more serious
matters.

“Have no fear, monsieur,” Rosaline said; “our peril could scarcely
be increased. We are all members of a proscribed religion, and it is
natural that we should all suffer together. It has been a pleasure to
my grandmother to be able to have you as her guest. We have been so
situated that we could do nothing for our fellow-religionists, and it
is much to her to do even so little for you.”

“So much,” he corrected gravely. “I was friendless and homeless, when
madame asked me to stay here, and I wish from my heart that I could be
of real service to you, instead of merely assuming a steward’s place as
a temporary disguise.”

He paused an instant, watching the young girl’s downcast face intently,
and then he spoke again, with yet more earnestness.

“I have been urging Madame de St. Cyr to leave this neighborhood,” he
said,--“to go to England. No one is safe here, and I cannot hope much
from this insurrection, when I think of the mighty force that the king
can hurl against these poor peasants.”

Rosaline raised her face, a look of inspiration on her delicate
features.

“Ah, monsieur,” she said, “you forget that the _bon Dieu_ is with us!
Surely we must win, when the Captain of our Salvation leads us.”

He looked at her with admiration in his eyes. How beautiful she was!

“That is true, mademoiselle,” he replied, “but it may not be His will
that we should conquer upon earth. The battle must be waged, and death
and destruction follow it. I cannot bear to think of you and madame
here in this château, in the very heart of it; for, doubtless, Cavalier
will assault Nîmes at last.”

“Madame de St. Cyr cannot go to England,” the girl said quietly; “she
is too old for the flight. We must face it.”

“Then, mademoiselle, I will remain with you here,” he declared.

She gave him a startled glance, coloring slightly.

“You promised your mother to go to England,” she reminded him; “and
your single sword could never defend us.”

“And my presence draws danger--you would add, mademoiselle,” he said
quietly; “that is true, but I shall not remain in this house, I shall
go to the Cévennes, and there I can still watch over you a little. I
shall indeed go to England, but not now.”

He spoke with such resolution that she attempted no reply. There was a
pause and again Truffe barked viciously at the other end of the hedge,
and a glint of red showed through a break in the thicket, but neither
of the two friends noticed it. At last the girl broke the silence.

“I suppose the end will come some time,” she said dreamily. “The old
château will be consumed by the flames that M. de Baudri’s troops will
kindle, the garden will be a desolate place, and Languedoc will know
us no more. I have lain awake at night thinking of it, monsieur, and
yet I am not afraid. I do not know why, but I have never been really
afraid of the day when this concealment must end. But oh, I do pray
that my grandmother may escape! I think of these things, and then I
come out and see God’s sun shining, and hear my doves coo, and it seems
impossible that the world is so cruel. Is it indeed so, monsieur? Is my
life here at St. Cyr a dream of peace amid the fierce world? Can it be
that this too, that I have always known, will end?”

His face was sad and stern, and he looked at her with sorrowful eyes.